Add javaFxPart5 guide (#13)
se-edu/guides: tutorials/javaFxPart5.md

<frontmatter>
  title: "JavaFX tutorial part 5 – Tweaking the GUI"
  pageNav: 2
</frontmatter>

# JavaFX tutorial part 5 – Tweaking the GUI (Optional)

This guide aims to help shorten the amount of time needed to learn some of the layout/CSS related stuff so that you may
focus more on designing your own GUI.

# Setting the dimensions

As you may have noticed, some of the boxes does not follow the dimension of the app.

To handle this, we have 3 choices:
1) [Automatically anchor nodes](#automatically-anchor-nodes)
2) [Set limit to window dimensions](#setting-limit-to-window-size)
3) Both

## Automatically Anchor Nodes

We want to [anchor](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/api/javafx/scene/layout/AnchorPane.html) the following nodes:
- Anchor `TextField` to the bottom while also automatically resize horizontally
- Anchor Send Button to the bottom right of the app
- Anchor the `ScrollPane` to resize both horizontally and vertically

### Automatically Anchor TextField
Open `src/main/resources/view/MainWindow.fxml` in SceneBuilder and click on `TextField`. On the right accordion pane you

> should be able to see the AnchorPane constraints of the `TextField`.

Author: Noted, thanks!

> ![SceneBuilder opening MainWindow.fxml with Layout view](images/javafx/TextFieldAnchorPaneConstraints1.png)

Author: Will look into this, thanks!

> ![SceneBuilder opening MainWindow.fxml with Layout view](images/javafx/TextFieldAnchorPaneConstraints1.png)

Author: Sure thing, is it sufficient to just provide the fxml code? Or will it be better to explain the code as well?

Since we want to automatically resize the `TextField` whenever we resize the window, we need to put an anchor
constraint on the **left and right edges**. Click on the left and right boxes as shown below, and it will automatically
set a value based on its current position relative to the AnchorPane. Note that the right side is set to 76 as this is
the width of the button next to it.

![Update AnchorPane constraints of TextField](images/javafx/TextFieldAnchorPaneConstraints2.png)

### Automatically Anchor Send Button
Since we want to anchor the button to the bottom right corner of the window, we
set the anchor values for the **bottom and right** side.

![Update AnchorPane constraints of Send Button](images/javafx/SendButtonAnchorPaneConstraints.png)

### Automatically Anchor ScrollPane
Since we want to resize the chat both horizontally and vertically, we set the anchor pane constraints to **all** edges.

At the same time we **enable Fit To Width** so that the content within the `ScrollPane` resize as well.

![Update AnchorPane constraints of ScrollPane](images/javafx/ScrollPaneAnchorPaneConstraints.png)

> Save `MainWindow.fxml` and you're done! Run and test your app out to see if it works when you resize the window.

Author: AFAIK, if you anchor only the `TextField`, the `ScrollPane` wont be resized. Likewise if the `ScrollPane` gets anchored, the `TextField` wont be resized unless I anchor both elements. Unless I misunderstood this.

> Save `MainWindow.fxml` and you're done! Run and test your app out to see if it works when you resize the window.

Reviewer: I see. In that case, perhaps suggest the reader to try resizing after anchoring the first element, and explain why it doesn't work fully yet? It might help the reader to better understand how the anchoring mechanism works.

> Save `MainWindow.fxml` and you're done! Run and test your app out to see if it works when you resize the window.

Author: Will do!

## Setting limit to Window size

Let's add a few restrictions to the window size so that the user can't resize the window too small. We can do this by
setting the minimum height and width.

If you don't want to let the user resize horizontally, you can set the maximum width = minimum width.

Update the `start` method as shown below.

**Main.java**

> ```java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java {heading="Main.java" highlight-lines="4-5"}
```

Just a suggestion only.

Author: Currently the highlighted lines look something like this:

![image](https://github.com/se-edu/guides/assets/40513197/a48b6866-aacb-4e3c-9aa0-b0cb744e4f11)

Is there a way to make the highlighted portions more brighter/more distinct? Can't seem to figure out from the MarkBind guide.

Reviewer: @flexibo MarkBind does not have a way to change the code highlight color.

public void start(Stage stage) {
    try {
        // current code...
        stage.setMinHeight(220);
        stage.setMinWidth(417);
        // stage.setMaxWidth(417); // Add this if you didn't automatically resize elements
        fxmlLoader.<MainWindow>getController().setDuke(duke);
        stage.show();
    } catch (IOException e) {
        e.printStackTrace();
    }
}
```

# Customize with JavaFX CSS!

> For current and future projects, you might need to customize colors, shapes, borders, and other design elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you want to customize colors, shapes, borders, and other design elements.
```

The most effective way to do this is through CSS, so this will be a mini [**JavaFX CSS**](https://docs.oracle.com/javafx/2/api/javafx/scene/doc-files/cssref.html)
introductory guide.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<box type="tip" seamless>

If you are new to CSS entirely, a quick way to learn the basics is [give a suitable resoruce here].
</box>
```

## Setting up and linking CSS to FXML

Create the following files in `src/main/resources/css`:

**main.css**
```css
.root {
    duke: rgb(237, 255, 242);       /* Create a looked-up color called "duke" within root. */
    -fx-background-color: duke;
}

.text-field {
    -fx-background-color: #d9ffe2;
    -fx-font: 20px "Arial";
}

.button {
    -fx-background-color: mediumspringgreen;

>     -fx-font: italic bold 16px "Arial";

Reviewer: Using a fixed-width font helps with the alignments. Compare the two below:

[x] First item
[ ] Second item

vs
```
[x] First item
[ ] Second item
```

Author: @damithc the varying font size is applied to the send button only, the checks are unaffected (just needed to make adjustments to number of space when a task is not marked):

![image](https://github.com/se-edu/guides/assets/40513197/a44eed57-2ae6-4d48-bafb-eb7aa19e5d32)

We created a style class specifically for this case:

**dialog-box.css**
```css
.reply-label {
    -fx-background-radius: 1em 1em 1em 0;
    -fx-border-radius: 1em 1em 1em 0;
}
```

We can add the `reply-label` style to the dialog box when we flip it.

Update the following code:

**DialogBox.java**
```java
 private void flip() {
     // current code...
     dialog.getStyleClass().add("reply-label");
 }
```

## Padding and Margin

In short, padding represents the space between the content and its border, while margin represents the invisible space
around the border.

![Padding and Margin](images/javafx/PaddingAndMargin.png)

Let us play around with the padding and margin of the text bubble.

Open `DialogBox.fxml` in SceneBuilder. Click on `Label`, and look at layout in the right accordion panel.

![Padding and Margin Demo](images/javafx/PaddingAndMarginDemo.png)

Play around with the padding and margin and find the parameters that is most suitable for you! To better view the
effects of the margin, you may either
- Run the app
- Select both image and label to view the distance between them
  ![View effects of margin](images/javafx/ViewEffectsOfMargin.png)

> 

Reviewer: Should we also include how to fix the text clipping problem? https://github.com/nus-cs2103-AY2324S2/forum/issues/208

Author: Yup, sounds good, will work on this.

Author: @damithc to follow up on this, since the issue is fixed by removing the `prefHeight` for VBox, is it possible to adjust that in the original code from the earlier parts instead?

Reviewer: Sure, that works too.

CSS properties for borders:

| CSS property      | Description                                          | 
|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `-fx-border-color`  | Set border color.                                    |
| `-fx-border-radius` | Set the "roundedness" of the border.                 |
| `-fx-border-width`  | Set border thickness.                                |
| `-fx-border-style`  | Set style of border (e.g., can be dashed or bolded). |
| `-fx-border-insets` | Set padding between the content and the border.      |

For _all_ of these properties, you can either set a single value to apply to all corners/sides, or you can set them
individually on each corner/side.

To demonstrate this, let us take a look at the following code for our text bubble:

**dialog-box.css**
```css
.label {
    ...
    -fx-border-color: #d55e00 #009e73 #cc79a7 #0072b2;
    ...
    -fx-background-radius: 1em 1em 0 1em;
    -fx-border-radius: 1em 1em 0 1em;
}
```

The values are set in a **clockwise** manner starting with the **top left corner/top edge**.

> ![BorderDemo](images/javafx/BorderDemo.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<pic src="images/javafx/BorderDemo.png" width="600" />
```

Otherwise the image appears disproportionate to the rest of the document.

## Color

There are a few ways to set a color.

> 1. Using `rgb(...)` / `rgba(...)` (use the fourth parameter to set opacity from 0 to 1)

Reviewer: Give an example, especially for the opacity?

2. Using HEX (`#ffffff`)
3. Using an existing [named color](https://docs.oracle.com/javafx/2/api/javafx/scene/doc-files/cssref.html#typecolor)
4. Using your own defined (looked-up) color

### Looked-up Color
You can define a color within the `.root` selector, which can be referenced by other classes
within the stylesheet.

**main.css**
```css
.root {
    duke: rgb(237, 255, 242);     /* Create a looked-up color called "duke" within root */
    -fx-background-color: duke;
}

.scroll-bar {
    ...
    -fx-background-color: duke;   /* Using looked-up color */
}

> ```

Reviewer: Use a meaningful name for the color?

Author: Hmmm, can't really think of an appropriate name, `themecolor` maybe?

### Gradient color

To set a [gradient color](https://docs.oracle.com/javafx/2/api/javafx/scene/doc-files/cssref.html#typepaint),
we can either use linear or radial gradient.

```css
-fx-background-color: linear-gradient(to bottom right, red, blue);
-fx-background-color: radial-gradient(radius 100%, red, purple, blue);
```

> 

Reviewer: Also show the result, using a screenshot?

```css
#displayPicture {
    /* Shadow effect on image. */
    -fx-effect: dropshadow(gaussian, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2), 10, 0.5, 5, 5);

    /* Change size of image. */
    -fx-scale-x: 1;
    -fx-scale-y: 1;

    /* Rotate image clockwise by degrees. */
    -fx-rotate: 0;
}
```

<box type="info" seamless>

Note that the `#` symbol is used to select the node by its ID (or variable),
meaning it applies the style to just `displayPicture` and not to `ImageView`s in general.
This is different from using a class selector (which uses a `.`).
</box>

There are 2 different types of [shadow effects](https://docs.oracle.com/javafx/2/api/javafx/scene/doc-files/cssref.html#typeeffect):

```css
    -fx-effect: dropshadow(gaussian, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2), 10, 0.5, 5, 5);
    -fx-effect: innershadow(gaussian, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2), 10, 0.5, 5, 5);
```
![Types of Shadows demo](images/javafx/TypesOfShadows.png)

If you use an image with a transparent background (e.g., [this doggy](https://pixabay.com/illustrations/dachshund-dog-hot-dog-animals-6336468/)),
the shadow effect will not apply to the transparent areas.

![Transparent background image demo](images/javafx/ImageShadowDemo.png)

> 

Reviewer: Using speech bubble as a caption might cause confusion. Perhaps crop it out and use something like this instead?

```suggestion
Drop shadow | Inner shadow | Transparent background
------------|--------------|-----------------------
![](images/javafx/ImageShadowDemo.png)| ![](images/javafx/ImageShadowDemo.png) | ![](images/javafx/ImageShadowDemo.png)
```suggestion

```

## General tips

The [JavaFX CSS reference guide](https://docs.oracle.com/javafx/2/api/javafx/scene/doc-files/cssref.html) is a very helpful way to
find out what properties are used for different nodes. You can also see the name of the style classes, like `.label` and
`.text-field`.

Some nodes don't have a style class name, like `ImageView`. In this case, you can either:
- [Create your own style class and the style class manually](#update-code-for-flipped-text-bubbles)
- [Apply style to just that specific node with the id (e.g., `#displayPicture`) instead](#image-and-shadows)

> # Other things to consider

Reviewer: For each of the items below, can we give a hint or a link to a suitable resource?

Here are other things you can do with your app to make it more personalized:
- Setting a placeholder in your `TextField` (e.g., "Type here... ")
- Change the title and icon of your app
- Change the send button to an icon
- Make profile pictures circular
- Set GIF as profile pictures
- Change the text box color if it is an error message
- Add [sound effects](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/javafx/api/javafx/scene/media/AudioClip.html)

>   when sending messages

Reviewer: How about setting a background image for the main chat area (and reducing opacity so that it doesn't  clash too much with the chat bubbles)?

Author: Sounds good, should I make a guide on this or do I add that under "Other things to consider"?

Reviewer: @flexibo My personal preference is to include it in the main part of this guide, but I'll leave it to you.

Author: @damithc Noted, is there anything else in the list that you think it is more suitable to be part of the main guide instead?

Reviewer: > @damithc Noted, is there anything else in the list that you think it is more suitable to be part of the main guide instead?

If not covered already, it might be good to explain (in the main body) a tweak that changes the UI dynamically based on the command typed e.g., change the speech bubble style if there is an error, or vary the speech bubble style based on the command.

[:fas-arrow-left: Previous](javaFxPart4.md) | [:fas-arrow-up: **ToC**](javaFx.md)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
**Authors:**

> * Initial Version: Debbie Hii 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Initial Version: Debbie Hii (@flexibo)
```
